hello rats fans this is the seventh
question from Tom rocks maths and I love
mathematics that you guys have voted for
me to answer and the winner this time is
what is the gamma function in its
simplest form the gamma function is just
an extension of the factorial function
if you take a positive whole number N
and then you do n factorial we represent
the factorial function by an exclamation
mark no idea why we do and n factorial
is simply n times n minus 1 times n
minus 2 times 2 times 2 times 1 so
basically the factorial of a number is
that number multiplied by all of the
whole numbers below it so 5 factorial is
5 times 4 times 3 times 2 times 1
now the gamma function when applied to a
positive whole number like for the
factorial function it's just defined by
n minus 1 factorial so gamma of n is
just n minus 1 factorial so you take
your number n take away 1 and then
multiply that new number by all the ones
below it so gamma of 6 would just be 5
factorial which is 5 times 4 times 3
times 2 times long so far by just
looking at the positive integers we
haven't really done anything very
exciting and the gamma function
certainly isn't anything new because
it's just the factorial function shifted
by 1 but the reason we have a separate
function called this gamma function is
because it's actually valid in a much
larger range of numbers than just the
positive integers and so if we consider
the complex plane so this is where your
real numbers are along the x-axis and
your imaginary numbers where you have
like the plus I along the imaginary axis
and the gamma function is absolutely
completely well-defined in the entire
right hand side of the complex plane so
for any complex number with a positive
real part the gamma function is well
defined and we define it via an
which is written here so gamma of Z
where Z is a positive real part complex
number so in the right hand side of our
complex plane gamma of Z is the integral
of norton Finiti of X to the power of
set minus 1 e to minus X DX and then to
get a completely well-defined
mathematical function we use a trick in
complex analysis which is called
analytic continuation and basically here
what we can do is say because this
integral of this function is well
defined on the entire right hand side of
the complex plane we can actually extend
it via analytic continuation to be valid
also in the left hand side of the
complex plane except for the negative
integers and so this graph right here
shows you the full extent of the gamma
function for almost any value for all
complex numbers except negative integers
now that we have a bit more of a feel
for the gamma function what it is what
it looks like how it's used what I'm
going to do now is actually show you
some of the properties of the function
and the first thing that we're going to
do is to show that these two definitions
are in fact the same so the first step
of our proof by induction is to consider
gamma of Z plus 1 and so writing this
out using the integral definition we
have gamma Z plus 1 it's X to the Z e to
the minus X I'm going to integrate this
and so we want to use integration by
parts so the X of the Z term that one
will be easy to differentiate so we'll
call that how are you our e to the minus
X would be our DV and so integrating
this we get our V which is minus e to
the minus X and then our u X to the Z
goes inside the evaluation of limits
part and then for the integral that were
left with we have the derivative of X to
the Z is there
X is F minus 1 and your minus minus
becomes plus e to the minus X now you'll
hopefully start to see that this looks
very similar to this where we started
but we have to deal with the evaluation
of the limits the parts inside the
square bracket and the 0 1 is pretty
straightforward because we have an X
term so substituting in x equals norms
gives us 0 so that term will just
disappear for the limit at infinity the
key point here in terms of evaluating it
is knowing which of these two terms will
win out because the polynomial terms
going to infinity the exponential term
is going to 0 and so infinity times 0
can be anything you have to have a
proper way of working that limit out
unfortunately here we can just use a
rule about the magnitude of limits and
that rule tells us that an exponential
limit will beat a polynomial limit so in
other words the exponential term will go
to 0 faster than the polynomial term
will go to infinity and so the
exponential term will win and so the
final limit is just 0 and so that one
also gives you 0 so this whole thing is
0 and so now that we've evaluated
everything here and the square bracket
term has completely disappeared because
it's 0 having calculated the limit
correctly we're just left with gamma of
Z plus 1 equals Z times gamma
zette and for the second part of our
proof by induction we just need to
calculate the first term and so we set Z
equal to 1 and so gamma of 1 using the
integral definition it's just X to the 1
minus 1 is X to the naught which is just
1 times e to the minus X integrating
respect to X and we can do this integral
we know the answer the function here
minus e to the minus X as X goes to
infinity that just hence
zero so that gives you nothing and then
you've got a minus minus gives you a
plus YZ are the Norton one and so we get
the answer of what and now with our two
steps of our inductive proof we're
pretty much that in trying to show
remember that this integral is the same
as the shifted factorial function for Z
being an integer positive integer we
have the gamma of the next number Z plus
one is just Z times gamma of Z and we
know the gamma of 1 is equal to one so
for example what would gamma of to be
well we can work it out which is one
time quad equals one and now gamma of
three and then gamma of for what would
that be and the key thing is that this
pattern would continue and you'll note
that each step you're basically just
working out gamma of n is equal to n
minus 1 factorial the final thing that I
want to show you about the gamma
function is possibly the coolest
property of it as a function and I'm
just going to write another board and
hopefully blow you away and then we'll
take a closer look and see why that is
the case gamma of 1/2 is equal to the
square root of pi so our starting point
is going to be well let's work out what
gamma of 1/2 is pretending that we don't
know that it's the square root of pile
that I haven't told you that and so
we're going to have to use the integral
definition because of course 1/2 is not
a positive integer the answer of gamma
of a half is simply just the result of
this integral now this is not at first
glance not an obvious integral to
calculate and to be able to do it what
we actually have to do is to look in a
different branch of probability and in
particular as some of you may have
spotted we want to consider the normal
distribution the normal distribution
is a particular type of probability
distribution has all kinds of incredible
properties it's really important really
useful I don't want to get too
sidetracked and go into everything you
need to know about the normal
distribution so I'm just going to focus
on the key things that we want to use
here in our calculation and what we need
to know is the probability density
function given here by Phi of X and in
this formula we have here mu which is
the mean of your set of data and Sigma
squared which is the standard deviation
of your data and the property that we
want to use while there are two we want
to use the fact that it's symmetrical
about the mean so it forms this lovely
bell-shaped curve which means that the
area on the left hand side is equal to
err on the right hand side and also the
fact that because it's a probability
density function if you integrate it
over all of space the total must be 1
because these properties are true for
any normal distribution we can actually
go one step further and pick a
particular distribution that best
relates to the integral we want to
calculate and in this case we just set
the mean to be zero so mu is zero
we set the standard deviation to be 1/2
Sigma squared is 1/2 and substituting
for our PDF by into the integral
equation with these particular values we
get this lovely integral and all you
have to do now to actually powerfully
this integral using this result is to
make a substitution the substitution
that we wanted is to let u equal the
square root of x so doing the chain rule
a little bit of rearranging we get that
DX is equal to X to the 1/2 times 2
times D U and so now if we change
variables in the integral we want to
calculate we actually have and this
integral right here is basically the
same as this one with just a few
constants floating around and so the
final answer is just cour of 1/2 equals
the square root of pi
so going from factorials and complex
numbers and they're just throwing in a
half you actually get back to this
irrational number pi it just appears
everywhere can't get rid of it pops up
everywhere in all branches of maths so
there you have it a whirlwind tour of
the pretty amazing gamma function I hope
you've enjoyed video and I hope that
I've answered your question so as always
thank you for sending the man and thank
you for voting please do remember if
you'd like what I'm doing subscribe to
my youtube channel you can also find me
on facebook twitter and instagram at tom
rocks maths and you can find all of the
material i make which is articles
interviews videos or on my website or
completely free
tom rocks maths calm thank you very much
and I'll see you next time